
[Illustration: Cover art]




[Frontispiece: THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.  _W. Holman Hunt._]





THE DOOR OF HEAVEN


A MANUAL FOR HOLY COMMUNION

[_for Young People_]



BY THE

VEN. A. E. BURGETT, M.A.




TWENTY-FIRST THOUSAND




LONDON

SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE

NEW YORK AND TORONTO: THE MACMILLAN CO.

1922




{3}

PREFACE.

This little Manual is intended for the use of young people, and is
therefore short and very simple.  The object of the compiler is to
place in the hands of candidates for Confirmation a little book that
may be a help to them in their daily life, as well as at the Service of
Holy Communion.

Grateful thanks are tendered to the holders of copyright for permission
to make use of the hymns printed at the end of the book.  Also, the
author begs to acknowledge ideas derived from examining similar
Manuals, especially "The Narrow Way," "Prayers for Boys," "Help to
Worship," and "Holy Communion" by Bishop How.

It is earnestly hoped that this little book may, with the blessing of
God, prove of service to those for whom it has been written, both in
helping their devotions, and in deepening their spiritual life.

A. E. B.




{5}

FOREWORD

BY THE RIGHT REVEREND MacADAM HARDING,

BISHOP OF QU'APPELLE.

A little book that will help the young and busy people in North-West
Canada to pray earnestly, day by day, and regularly make a good
Communion, must receive a warm welcome from the Bishop of a Diocese
where the great majority of the people are both young and busy.

I know the earnest desire of the compiler to help our young men and
women to draw near to God in Prayer and Sacrament, and I hope many of
them will find herein the very assistance they need.

M. M. QU'APPELLE.

REGINA




{7}

THE DOOR OF HEAVEN


DAILY PRAYERS

MORNING

Kneel down and say:--

In the presence of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

_Try to realize that you are in the presence of God, and then say_:--

Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name.  Thy kingdom
come.  Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven.  Give us this day
our daily bread.  And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them
that trespass against us.  And lead us not into temptation; But deliver
us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, The power, and the glory, For
ever and ever.  Amen.

I thank Thee, O heavenly Father, for keeping me safe through the past
night, and giving me rest and sleep.  Bless me, I beseech Thee, during
this day, and guard me from all dangers, both to body and soul, for
Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

{8}

Bless, O Lord, my father and mother, my brothers and sisters (and
others whom you wish to pray for).  Keep them safe and well, and help
them, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

O Lord, our heavenly Father, Almighty and ever-lasting God, who hast
safely brought me to the beginning of this day; defend me in the same
with Thy mighty power; and grant that this day I may fall into no sin,
neither run into any kind of danger; but that all my doings may be
ordered by Thy governance to do always that is righteous in Thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.

May God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost bless,
preserve, and keep me now and for evermore.  Amen.


MID-DAY.

_Always try to think of God for a minute at mid-day; say,_,

O Father Almighty, whose Son our Lord Jesus Christ did at this hour
bear our sins in His own body upon the Cross, have mercy upon me, help
me, bless me, and be with me now and at the hour of my death, through
the same Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.


EVENING.

Kneel down and say:--

In the presence of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

{9}

_Try to realize that you are in the very presence of God, and then
say_:--

Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name.  Thy kingdom
come.  Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven.  Give us this day
our daily bread.  And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them
that trespass against us.  And lead us not into temptation; But deliver
us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, The power, and the glory, For
ever and ever.  Amen.

O Heavenly Father, I thank Thee for having kept me safe through this
day, and for all Thy other mercies to me.  Show me how I have sinned
against Thee this day, and make me sorry for my sins.

_Then try to remember your sins of the day, and ask yourself such
questions at these_:--

What wrong thing have I done to-day?

What evil words have I spoken?

What bad thoughts have I given way to?


_Then ask God's forgiveness, and say_:--

Forgive me, O God, for what I have done wrong to-day, and help me to do
better for the future, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

Bless, O Lord, my father and mother, my brothers and sisters (and
others whom you wish to pray for).  Keep them safe and well, and help
them, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

Lighten our darkness, we beseech Thee, O Lord; {10} and by Thy great
mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night; for the love
of Thy only Son, our Saviour, Jesus Christ.  Amen.

Into Thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit.  Take care of me this
night, and defend me from evil both in body and soul, for Jesus
Christ's sake.  Amen.

May God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, bless,
preserve, and keep me now and for evermore.  Amen.


(_If you need further devotions, you can use some of the prayers on pp.
_12_ and _13_, or read some of the hymns on pp. _53_ and _54.

_It is good to read a few verses of the Bible every night_.)




{11}

RULES FOR DAILY LIFE.

Think nothing that you would be ashamed to tell to God.

Say nothing you would not like God to hear.

Do nothing you would not like God to see.

If tempted, get away from the danger at once, and keep away.

If an evil thought comes to you, throw it out.  Pray for help.  Say:
"Lord, help me."  "God, help me."  "O Holy Spirit, strengthen me."


GRACE BEFORE MEALS.

Bless, O Lord, the food we are about to receive, and make us mindful of
the wants of others, for Jesus' sake.  Amen.


GRACE AFTER MEALS.

For these and all His mercies God's Holy Name be praised.




{12}

VARIOUS PRAYERS

BEFORE SERVICE.

Keep me, O Lord, from wandering thoughts in this Thy Service, and may
my prayers and my praise be pleasing to Thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.  Amen.


AFTER SERVICE.

Accept, O Lord, this my service of praise and thanksgiving, and pardon
all that Thou hast seen amiss, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.


FOR HONESTY.

O Almighty God, Who out of Thine abundance givest to all men that which
seemeth best in Thy sight; give me strength to be in all things honest
before Thee in my daily work and life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


FOR FORGIVENESS.

May the Almighty God have mercy upon me, pardon all my sins, and bring
me to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.


[Illustration: "OTHER REFUGE HAVE I NONE."  _J. Lafayette_.]


{13}

FOR FAITH.

Give me, O Lord my God, a firm and living faith in Thee, that I may
believe all Thy Holy Church teaches, and Thy Holy Word reveals, for
Jesus' sake.  Amen.


FOR PURITY.

O Almighty God, of Thy mercy help me in temptation and keep me from all
Impure thoughts, impure words, and impure deeds.  Preserve me clean and
spotless, that my body may be a holy temple fit for Thee to dwell in,
for Jesus' sake.  Amen.


FOR LENT.

[Lent is the period of forty days before Easter; by keeping it we
follow the example of our blessed Lord and Saviour.  Examine your whole
life, ask for pardon and strength to do better, and deny yourself
something every day in food, comfort, sleep, or enjoyment.]


O blessed Saviour, Who didst fast in the desert for forty days for our
sakes, and to set us a holy example of self-denial, grant that I may
faithfully use this time of Lent which Thy Holy Church has set apart,
that I may follow Thee in prayer and self-denial, and confessing my
sins to God, may be pardoned, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.




{14}

PREPARATION FOR HOLY COMMUNION.

St. Paul says, "Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup."

You must guard against the danger of coming carelessly and without
preparation to Holy Communion; so make a rule to always examine
yourself carefully before you come.

First kneel down and say:--

O God, Thou knowest everything that I have said, and thought, and done.
Help me now to examine myself, that I may see my sins and be sorry for
them.  Send Thy Holy Spirit into my heart to help me, for Jesus
Christ's sake.  Amen.

Then ask yourself:--

1.  Am I trying to love and serve God with all my heart?

2.  Have I fallen into any special sin, which is troubling my mind, and
keeping me back from God?

3.  Have I said my prayers reverently and carefully every night and
morning?

4.  Have I been to Church every Sunday, and kept the rest of the day as
I ought?

{15}

5.  Have I tried to forgive any who may have done me a wrong?

6.  Have I done anything impure, or said anything impure, or encouraged
any impure thought?

7.  Have I been honest in everything?

8.  Have I always told the truth?

9.  Have I thought or spoken evil of another?

10.  Have I quarrelled with any one, or lost my temper?

11.  Is there any sin I am not willing to give up?

12.  Have I been regular in my times of receiving the Holy Communion?

Whenever you find you have been wrong, confess your fault to God, and
ask for his pardon; say:--

O Father Almighty, forgive me for this sin that I have committed, and
send down Thy Holy Spirit into my heart that I may do better in the
future, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

[_If you have any trouble in your mind, or cannot quiet your own
conscience, either from some sin that you have committed, or from doubt
as to whether you ought to come to Holy Communion, do not be afraid to
go to your Clergyman, and ask him to help you_.]

_Also on Saturday night or Sunday morning use the following Office of
Preparation_:--

Kneel down and say:--

    LORD, have mercy upon me.
    CHRIST, have mercy upon me.
    LORD, have mercy upon me.

{16}

Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name.  Thy kingdom
come.  Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven.  Give us this day
our daily bread.  And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them
that trespass against us.  And lead us not into temptation, But deliver
us from evil.  Amen.

I am truly sorry, O Lord, that I have grieved Thee by my sins, and I
wish that my sorrow was far greater.  I am not worthy to be called Thy
child, but Thou art still my most merciful Father.  Make me to hate sin
and to long for holiness: for Jesus' sake.  Amen.

I love Thee, O my God, for all Thy mercy to me, and I desire to love
Thee more and more.  Let no earthly love possess my heart, so as to let
me forget Thee.  Give me Thy Holy Spirit that I may love Thee more
truly, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

O Heavenly Father, I am about to draw near to the most Holy Sacrament
of the Body and Blood of Thy dear Son.  Have mercy upon me; have mercy
upon me, for I am most unworthy.  But, O my God, look not upon my sin,
but look upon the Face of Thy Son.  Thy dear Son hath died that we may
come with boldness unto Thee.  Therefore I come.  Oh, may I so eat and
drink that I may be partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ to the
strengthening and refreshing of my soul, and may be one with Him
through the power of the Holy Spirit.  Hear me, and {17} accept me, O
most merciful Father, for the sake of the same my crucified Saviour.
Amen.

[Illustration: BEARING THE CROSS.  _Ary Scheffer_.]

May God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be with me now
and at the hour of death.  Amen.


THE DAY OF COMMUNION.

_Be careful to be at Church in good time, and while waiting for the
Service to begin, say one or more of these Prayers_:--

Cleanse Thou me, O Lord, from my secret faults, and mercifully pardon
my sins, that I may receive Thy holy gifts with a pure mind; through
Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God, I come to the holy Sacrament of Thy dear
Son.  I draw near weak, to the Giver of Strength; unclean, to the
Fountain of Mercy; blind, to the Eternal Light; poor and needy, to the
Lord of heaven and earth.  I pray Thee, therefore, of Thy great
goodness, to have mercy upon me, that so I may receive the King of
kings, and Lord of lords, with such reverence and purity and faith, as
shall be for the health of my soul.  Let me now receive the Body and
Blood of Jesus my Lord, that I may be one Body and one Spirit with Him,
and ever remain among His members.  Grant this for the same Jesus
Christ's sake.  Amen.

I do not presume to come to Thy table, O merciful Lord, trusting in my
own righteousness, but in {18} Thy manifold and great mercies.  I am
not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under Thy table.  But
Thou art the same Lord, Whose property is always to have mercy: Grant
me therefore, gracious Lord, so to eat the Flesh of Thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, and to drink His Blood, that my sinful body may be made clean
by His Body, and my soul washed through His most precious Blood, and
that I may evermore dwell in Him and He in me.  Amen.


_Or this_.


O Blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, not trusting in my own goodness, but in
Thy great merits, I desire to receive the holy Sacrament of Thy Body
and Blood.  I am stained with many sins; do Thou wash me in Thy
precious Blood.  I am faint and weary in my strife against sin; do Thou
refresh and strengthen me.  Give me perfect purity of soul and body;
drive from me all unholy thoughts, and keep me from every evil word and
deed.  Give me grace to draw near to this holy Sacrament with such
reverence and fear, such holy joy and fervent love, such sorrow for sin
and desires for holiness, that I may enjoy all the blessings and
receive all the benefits which Thou hast obtained for us through Thy
precious death.  Amen.

_If you have any more time before the Service begins, you can use the
Hymns at the end of the book_.




{19}

THE ORDER FOR THE

ADMINISTRATION OF THE LORD'S SUPPER,

OR

HOLY COMMUNION.


[The parts of the Service which you are to repeat are printed in
_italic_ letters.]

Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy name.  Thy kingdom
come.  Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven.  Give us this day
our daily bread.  And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us.  And lead us not into temptation; but deliver
us from evil.  Amen.


_The Collect_.

Almighty God, unto Whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from
Whom no secrets are hid; cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the
inspiration of Thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love Thee, and
worthily {20} magnify Thy holy Name; through Christ our Lord.  _Amen_.


THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

[_As each commandment is read, ask yourself,_

"Have I kept this commandment?"

_Then join with all your heart in the words,_

"_Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law_."]


_Minister_.

God spake these words, and said; I am the Lord thy God: Thou shalt have
none other gods but me.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

{21}

_Minister_.  Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image, nor the
likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath,
or in the water under the earth.  Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor
worship them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the
sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate Me, and show mercy unto thousands in them
that love Me, and keep My commandments.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His Name in vain.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.


Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.  Six days shalt thou
labour, and do all that thou hast to do; but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God.  In it thou shalt do no manner of work,
thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy
maid-servant, thy cattle, and the stranger that is within thy gates.
For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day, and hallowed it.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Honour thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be
long in the land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Thou shalt do no murder.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Thou shalt not commit adultery.

{22}

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Thou shalt not steal.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
law_.

_Minister_.  Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox,
nor his ass, nor anything that is his.

_People.  Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these Thy laws in our
hearts, we beseech Thee_.


Then shall follow one of these two Collects for the King.


LET US PRAY.

Almighty God, whose kingdom is ever-lasting, and power infinite; Have
mercy upon the whole Church; and so rule the heart of Thy chosen
servant GEORGE, our King and Governor, that he (knowing whose minister
he is) may above all things seek Thy honour and glory: and that we, and
all his subjects (duly considering Whose authority he hath) may
faithfully serve, honour, and humbly obey him, in Thee, and for Thee,
{23} according to Thy blessed Word and ordinance, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Who with Thee and the Holy Ghost liveth and reigneth, ever
one God, world without end.  Amen.


_Or,_


Almighty and Everlasting God, we are taught by Thy holy Word that the
hearts of kings are in Thy rule and governance, and that Thou dost
dispose and turn them as it seemeth best to Thy godly wisdom: we humbly
beseech Thee so to dispose and govern the heart of GEORGE Thy servant,
our King and Governor, that, in all his thoughts, words, and works, he
may ever seek Thy honour and glory, and study to preserve Thy people
committed to his charge, in wealth, peace, and godliness.  Grant this,
O merciful Father, for Thy dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


Here follow

THE COLLECT, EPISTLE, AND GOSPEL.

[If you have your Prayer Book with you, find out the Collect, Epistle,
and Gospel of the day.  Before the Gospel say, "_Glory be to Thee, O
Lord_", and after the Gospel, "_Thanks be to Thee, O Lord_."]


{24}

THE CREED.

_I believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth,
And of all things visible and invisible:_

_And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, Begotten
of His Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God
of very God, Begotten, not made, Being of one substance with the
Father; By Whom all things were made, Who for us men and for our
salvation came down from heaven, And was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of
the Virgin Mary, And was made man, And was crucified also for us under
Pontius Pilate.  He suffered and was buried, And the third day He rose
again according to the Scriptures, And ascended into heaven, And
sitteth on the right hand of the Father.  And he shall come again with
glory to judge both the quick and the dead; Whose kingdom shall have no
end_.

_And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, Who
proceedeth from the Father and the Son, Who with the Father and the Son
together is worshipped and glorified, Who spake by the Prophets.  And I
believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church.  I acknowledge one Baptism
for the remission of sins, and I look for the Resurrection of the dead,
and the life of the world to come.  Amen_.


[Then the alms are collected while one or more of the Offertory
Sentences are read.  Always try to give {25} something at the
Offertory, no matter how small the amount is, but never stay away from
the service because you have nothing to give.  When you have made your
offering, kneel down, and say:--

_All that is in heaven and in the earth is Thine.  All things come of
Thee, and of Thine Own have I given Thee_.]


[Illustration: THE CRUCIFIXION.]


THE OFFERTORY SENTENCES.

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.  _St. Matt._ v.

Lay not up for yourselves treasure upon the earth; where the rust and
moth doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay
up for yourselves treasures in heaven; where neither rust nor moth doth
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.  _St. Matt._
vi.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them;
for this is the Law and the Prophets.  _St. Matt._ vii.

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in
heaven.  _St. Matt._ vii.

Zacchæus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor; and if I have done any {26} wrong to any
man, I restore fourfold.  _St. Luke_ xix.

Who goeth a warfare at any time of his own cost?  Who planteth a
vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof?  Or who feedeth a flock,
and eateth not of the milk of the flock?  1 _Cor._ ix.

If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we
shall reap your worldly things?  1 _Cor._ ix.

Do ye not know, that they who minister about holy things live of the
sacrifice; and they who wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?
Even so hath the Lord also ordained, that they who preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel.  1 _Cor._ ix.

He that soweth little shall reap little; and he that soweth plenteously
shall reap plenteously.  Let every man do according as he is disposed
in his heart, not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loveth a
cheerful giver.  2 _Cor._ ix.

Let him that is taught in the Word minister unto him that teacheth in
all good things.  Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a
man soweth that shall he reap.  _Gal._ vi.

While we have time, let us do good unto all men; and specially unto
them that are of the household of faith.  _Gal._ vi.

{27}

Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with that he hath: for
we brought nothing into the world, neither may we carry anything out.
1 _Tim._ vi.

Charge them who are rich in this world, that they be ready to give, and
glad to distribute; laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may attain eternal life.  1 _Tim._
vi.

God is not unrighteous, that He will forget your works, and labour that
proceedeth of love; which love ye have showed for His Name's sake, who
have ministered unto the saints, and yet do minister.  _Heb._ vi.

To do good and to distribute forget not; for with such sacrifices God
is well pleased.  _Heb._ xiii.

Whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and
shutteth up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in
him?  1 _St. John_ iii.

Give alms of thy goods, and never turn thy face from any poor man; and
then the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee.  _Tobit_
iv.

Be merciful after thy power.  If thou hast much, give plenteously: if
thou hast little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little: for
so gatherest thou thyself a good reward in the day of necessity.
_Tobit_ iv.

{28}

He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord: and look, what
he layeth out, it shall be paid him again.  _Prov._ xix.

Blessed be the man that provideth for the sick and needy: the Lord
shall deliver him in the time of trouble.  _Psalm_ xli.


Whilst these sentences are in reading, the Deacons, Church-wardens, or
other fit person appointed for that purpose, shall receive the Alms for
the Poor, and other devotions of the people, in a decent basin to be
provided by the Parish for that purpose; and reverently bring it to the
Priest, who shall humbly present and place it upon the holy Table.

And when there is a Communion, the Priest shall then place upon the
Table so much Bread and Wine as he shall think sufficient.


After which done, the Priest shall say,

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here in
earth.

Almighty and everliving God, who by Thy holy Apostle hast taught us to
make prayers, and supplications, and to give thanks for all men; We
humbly beseech Thee most mercifully to accept our alms and oblations,
and to receive these our prayers which we offer unto Thy Divine
Majesty: beseeching Thee to inspire continually the universal {29}
Church with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant, that
all they that do confess Thy holy Name may agree in the truth of Thy
holy Word, and live in unity, and godly love.  We beseech Thee also to
save and defend all Christian kings, princes, and governors; and
specially Thy servant George, our King, that under him we may be godly
and quietly governed: And grant unto his whole council, and to all that
are put in authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently
minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the
maintenance of Thy true religion and virtue.  Give grace, O heavenly
Father, to all Bishops and Curates, that they may, both by their life
and doctrine, set forth Thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly
administer Thy holy Sacraments.  And to all Thy people give Thy
heavenly grace; and especially to this congregation here present; that
with meek heart and due reverence they may hear and receive Thy holy
Word, truly serving Thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life.  And we most humbly beseech Thee of Thy goodness, O Lord,
to comfort and succour all them who, in this transitory life, are in
trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity.  And we also
bless Thy holy {30} Name for all Thy servants departed this life in Thy
faith and fear; beseeching Thee to give us grace so to follow their
good examples, that with them we may be partakers of Thy heavenly
kingdom: Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator and Advocate.  _Amen_.


THE EXHORTATION.

[When the Exhortation is read attend to it very carefully, for it is
full of instruction.  You will find it in your Prayer-book.]


THE INVITATION.

Then shall the Priest say to them that come to receive the Holy
Communion,


Ye that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and are in love
and charity with your neighbours, and intend to lead a new life,
following the commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in His
holy ways; Draw near with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to your
comfort; and make your humble confession to Almighty God, meekly
kneeling upon your knees.


Then shall this general Confession be made, in the name of all those
that are minded to receive the holy Communion, by one of the Ministers;
both he and all the people kneeling humbly upon their knees, and
saying:--

{31}

_Almighty God, Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things,
Judge of all men; We acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and
wickedness, which we, from time to time, most grievously have
committed, by thought, word, and deed, against Thy Divine Majesty,
provoking most justly Thy wrath and indignation against us.  We do
earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for these our misdoings; The
remembrance of them is grievous unto us; The burden of them is
intolerable.  Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful
Father; For Thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that
is past; And grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in
newness of life, to the honour and glory of Thy name; Through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  Amen_.


Then shall the Priest (or the Bishop, being present) stand up, and
turning himself to the people, pronounce this Absolution.


Almighty God, our heavenly Father, who of His great mercy hath promised
forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty repentance and true
faith turn unto Him; Have mercy upon you; pardon and deliver you from
all your sins; confirm and strengthen you in all goodness; and bring
you to everlasting life; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  _Amen_.



{32}

Then shall the Priest say,


Hear what comfortable words our Saviour Christ saith unto all that
truly turn to Him.

Come unto Me, all that travail and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you.  _St. Matt._ xi. 28.

So God loved the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, to the end
that all that believe in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.  _St. John_ iii. 16.

Hear also what St. Paul saith.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.  1 _Tim._ i. 15.

Hear also what St. John saith.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and He is the propitiation for our sins.  1 _St. John_ ii.
1, 2.

After which the Priest shall proceed, saying,

Lift up your hearts.

_Answer.  We lift them up unto the Lord_.

_Priest_.  Let us give thanks unto our Lord God.

_Answer.  It is meet and right so to do_.

{33}

Then shall the Priest turn to the Lord's Table, and say,

It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty that we should at all
times, and in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, *Holy Father,
Almighty, Everlasting God.


* _These words_ [Holy Father] _must be omitted on Trinity Sunday_.


Here shall follow the Proper Preface, according to the time, if there
be any specially appointed: or else immediately shall follow,


Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of
heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious Name; evermore praising Thee,
and saying, _Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, heaven and earth are
full of thy glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord most High.  Amen_.


PROPER PREFACES.

[These are used only at the Seasons named.]

Upon CHRISTMAS DAY, and seven days after.

Because Thou didst give Jesus Christ Thine only Son to be born as at
this time for us; who, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, was made
very man of the {34} substance of the Virgin Mary his mother; and that
without spot of sin, to make us clean from all sin.  Therefore with
Angels, &c.


Upon EASTER DAY, and seven days after.

But chiefly are we bound to praise Thee for the glorious Resurrection
of Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord: for He is the very Paschal Lamb,
which was offered for us, and hath taken away the sin of the world; who
by His death hath destroyed death, and by His rising to life again hath
restored to us everlasting life.  Therefore with Angels, &c.


_Upon_ ASCENSION DAY, _and seven days after_.

Through Thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord; who after
his most glorious resurrection manifestly appeared to all his Apostles,
and in their sight ascended up into heaven to prepare a place for us;
that where He is, thither we might also ascend, and reign with Him in
glory.  Therefore with angels, &c.


_Upon_ WHIT SUNDAY, _and six days after_.

Through Jesus Christ our Lord; according to whose most true promise,
the Holy Ghost came down as at this time from heaven with a sudden
great sound, as it had {35} been a mighty wind, in the likeness of
fiery tongues, lighting upon the Apostles, to teach them, and to lead
them to all truth; giving them both the gift of divers languages, and
also boldness with fervent zeal constantly to preach the Gospel unto
all nations; whereby we have been brought out of darkness and error
into the clear light and true knowledge of Thee, and of Thy Son Jesus
Christ.  Therefore with Angels, &c.


_Upon the Feast of_ TRINITY _only_.

Who art one God, one Lord; not one only Person, but three Persons in
one Substance.  For that which we believe of the glory of the Father,
the same we believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any
difference or inequality.  Therefore with Angels, &c.


After each of which Prefaces shall immediately be sung or said,

Therefor with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of
heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious Name; evermore praising Thee,
and saying, _Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, heaven and earth are
full of Thy glory: Glory be to Thee, O Lord most high.  Amen_.

{36}

Then shall the Priest, kneeling down at the Lord's Table, say in the
name of all them that shall receive the Communion this Prayer following,


We do not presume to come to this Thy Table, O merciful Lord, trusting
in our own righteousness, but in Thy manifold and great mercies.  We
are not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under Thy Table.  But
Thou art the same Lord, Whose property is always to have mercy: Grant
us therefore, gracious Lord, so to eat the Flesh of Thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, and to drink His Blood, that our sinful bodies may be made
clean by His Body, and our souls washed through His most precious
Blood, and that we may evermore dwell in Him, and He in us.  _Amen_.


[Now you are coming to the most solemn part of the whole Service--the
Prayer of Consecration.  The Priest is speaking for you to God, and is
consecrating, or making sacred and holy, the Bread and the Wine you are
going to receive.  Try to follow every word most reverently, and join
heartily in the "Amen" at the close.]


THE PRAYER OF CONSECRATION.

When the Priest, standing before the Table, hath so ordered the Bread
and Wine that he may with the more readiness and decency break the
Bread before {37} the people, and take the Cup into his hands, he shall
say the Prayer of Consecration, as followeth:

Almighty God, our heavenly Father, who of Thy tender mercy didst give
Thine only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the cross for our
redemption; who made there (by His one oblation of Himself once
offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and
satisfaction, for the sins of the whole world; and did institute, and
in His holy Gospel command us to continue, a perpetual memory of that
His precious death, until His coming again; Hear us, O merciful Father,
we most humbly beseech Thee; and grant that we receiving these Thy
creatures of bread and wine, according to Thy Son our Saviour Jesus
Christ's holy institution, in remembrance of His death and passion, may
be partakers of His most blessed Body and Blood: who, in the same night
that He was betrayed, [_Here the Priest is to take the Paten into his
hands:] took bread; and when He had given thanks, [_And here to break
the Bread:] He brake it, and gave it to His Disciples, saying, Take,
eat, [_And here to lay his hand upon all the bread_.] this is My Body
which is given for you: Do this in remembrance of Me.  Likewise after
supper He [_Here he is to take to Cup into his hand_:] took the Cup;
and when He had given thanks.  He gave it to {38} them, saying, Drink
ye all of this; for this [_And here to lay his hand upon every vessel_
(_be it Chalice or Flagon_) _in which there is any Wine to be
consecrated_.] is My Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you
and for many for the remission of sins: Do this, as oft as ye shall
drink it, in remembrance of Me.  _Amen_.


[You will have some time for private prayer, either before you go up to
receive, or after you return to your place.  Spend this time on your
knees, speaking to God.  Tell Him all about your difficulties--about
the sin you find it so hard to conquer.  Ask God to help you.  When it
is time for you to receive, go up quietly, and, as you kneel, think of
Jesus Himself saying, "Whoso eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood,
hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day."  Say
secretly: "Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned
against Thee.]


_The Minister, when he gives you the Bread, will say,_

"The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve
thy body and soul unto everlasting life.  Take and eat this in
remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on Him in thy heart by
faith with thanksgiving.


[After the words "everlasting life" you can say "_Amen_" softly.  And
at the end you can say in your heart:--

"_Lord, I believe: help Thou mine unbelief._"]

{39}

_The Minister, when he gives you the Cup, will say,_

"The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve
thy body and soul unto everlasting life.  Drink this in remembrance
that Christ's Blood was shed for thee, and be thankful.

[Say _Amen_ devoutly, as before, after the words "ever-lasting life,"
and at the end you may say in your heart:--

"_Thanks and Praise be to Thee, O Lord!_"

Wait until the one next to you has received, and then return to your
place and kneel, thanking God again for His mercies to you.  Pray that
you may not fall back into sin.  Say:--

O God of all mercy, may this most blessed Sacrament which I have
received convey to my soul grace and peace, that being made clean, I
may sin no more.  I ask this for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.

[If you still have time, you may use now the Hymns given at the end of
this book.]


When all have communicated, the Minister shall return to the Lord's
Table, and reverently place upon it what remaineth of the consecrated
elements, covering the same with a fair linen cloth.

Then shall the Priest say the Lord's Prayer, the people repeating after
him every Petition.


_Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy Name.  Thy kingdom
come.  Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven.  Give us this day
our {40} daily bread.  And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us.  And lead us not into temptation; But
deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, The power, and the
glory, for ever and ever.  Amen._


After shall be said as followeth,

O Lord and heavenly Father, we Thy humble servants entirely desire Thy
fatherly goodness mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving; most humbly beseeching Thee to grant that, by the merits
and death of Thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in His Blood, we
and all Thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins, and all
other benefits of His passion.  And here we offer and present unto
Thee, O Lord, ourselves, our souls, and bodies to be a reasonable,
holy, and lively sacrifice unto Thee; humbly beseeching Thee, that all
we who are partakers of this holy Communion, may be fulfilled with Thy
grace and heavenly benediction.  And although we be unworthy, through
our manifold sins, to offer unto Thee any sacrifice, yet we beseech
Thee to accept this our bounden duty and service; not weighing our
merits, but pardoning our offences, through Jesus Christ our Lord: by
whom, and with whom, in the unity of the Holy {41} Ghost, all honour
and glory be unto Thee, O Father Almighty, world without end.  _Amen_.


_Or this,_


Almighty and everliving God, we most heartily thank Thee, for that Thou
dost vouchsafe to feed us, who have duly received these holy mysteries,
with the spiritual food of the most precious Body and Blood of Thy Son,
our Saviour Jesus Christ; and dost assure us thereby of thy favour and
goodness towards us; and that we are very members incorporate in the
mystical Body of Thy Son, which is the blessed company of all faithful
people; and are also heirs through hope of Thy everlasting kingdom, by
the merits of the most precious death and passion of Thy dear Son.  And
we most humbly beseech Thee, O heavenly Father, so to assist us with
Thy grace, that we may continue in that holy fellowship, and do all
such good works, as Thou hast prepared for us to walk in, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honour
and glory, world without end.  _Amen_.


THE GLORIA IN EXCELSIS.

Then shall be said or sung,

_Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will towards men.
We praise Thee, we bless {42} Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee,
we give thanks to Thee for Thy great glory, O Lord God, heavenly King,
God the Father Almighty_.

_O Lord, the only-begotten Son Jesu Christ; O Lord God, Lamb of God,
Son of the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us.  Thou that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon
us.  Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive our prayer.
Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father, have mercy upon
us_.

_For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord; Thou only, O Christ,
with the Holy Ghost, art most high in the Glory of God the Father.
Amen_.


THE BLESSING.

The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be amongst you and remain with you always.  _Amen_.

[Do not be in a hurry to rise from your knees.  Thank God once more for
all He has done for you.  Pray again for help to persevere.  Say one or
more of the following thanksgivings and prayers:--]

{43}

THANKSGIVING AFTER HOLY COMMUNION.

I give Thee thanks, O Lord, holy Father, Almighty, everlasting God, who
hast refreshed me with the most holy Body and Blood of Thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord; and I pray that this Sacrament which I have received
may be to the strengthening of my body and soul unto life eternal,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.

O God, who hast in Thy great mercy permitted me to draw near this day
to the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Thy dear Son; I give
Thee hearty thanks and praise for this Thy goodness.  Lord, I thank
Thee: help Thou my unthankfulness.  Teach me more and more to feel and
know the richness and freedom of Thy love.  Teach me more and more to
prize and to long for this holy feast of heavenly Food.  Give me an
ever-thankful heart, that so I may live ever a life of thankfulness,
serving Thee, not as a slave, but as a loving child, in the spirit of
adoption, and as sharing in the glorious liberty of Thy children.  Oh,
keep me from falling back; lead me onward by Thy grace; and bring me at
last to the unveiled presence of my Saviour in heaven, through the same
Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord.  Amen.


Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise His holy
Name.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His {44} benefits; who
forgiveth all thy sin, and healeth all thine infirmities; who saveth
thy life from destruction, and crowneth thee with mercy and loving
kindness.

"Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable gift!"  Amen.


May God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, bless,
preserve, and keep me, now and for evermore.  Amen.




{45}

HYMNS.


1.

HOLY COMMUNION

  1 Bread of heaven, on Thee we feed,
    For Thy Flesh is meat indeed;
    Ever may our souls be fed
    With this true and living Bread;
    Day by day with strength supplied
    Through the life of Him who died.

  2 Vine of heaven, Thy Blood supplies
    This blest cup of sacrifice;
    Lord, Thy wounds our healing give,
    To Thy Cross we look and live:
    Jesus, may we ever be
    Grafted, rooted, built on Thee.  Amen.


2.

  1 According to Thy gracious word,
      In meek humility,
    This will I do, my dying Lord,
      I will remember Thee.

{46}

  2 Thy Body, broken for my sake,
      My Bread from heaven shall be:
    Thy cup of blessing I will take,
      And thus remember Thee.

  3 Can I Gethsemane forget?
      Or there Thy conflict see,
    Thine agony and bloody sweat,
      And not remember Thee?

  4 When to the Cross I turn mine eyes,
      And rest on Calvary,
    O Lamb of God, my sacrifice,
      I must remember Thee.

  5 Remember Thee, and all Thy pains,
      And all Thy love to me;
    Yea, while a breath, a pulse remains,
      Will I remember Thee.

  6 And when these failing lips grow dumb,
      And mind and memory flee,
    When Thou shalt in Thy kingdom come,
      Jesu, remember me.  Amen.


3.

  1 O God, unseen, yet ever near,
      Thy presence may we feel;
    And thus, inspired with holy fear,
      Before Thine altar kneel.

{47}

  2 Here may Thy faithful people know
      The blessings of Thy love;
    The streams that through the desert flow,
      The Manna from above.

  3 We come, obedient to Thy word,
      To feast on heavenly Food;
    Our meat the Body of the Lord,
      Our drink, His precious Blood.

  4 Thus may we all Thy word obey,
      For we, O God, are Thine;
    And go rejoicing on our way,
      Renewed with strength divine.  Amen.


4.

  1 I am not worthy, Holy Lord,
      That Thou shouldst come to me,
    Speak but the word, one gracious word
      Can set the sinner free.

  2 I am not worthy: cold and bare
      The lodging of my soul;
    How canst Thou deign to enter there?
      Lord, speak, and make me whole.

  3 I am not worthy; yet, my God,
      How can I say Thee nay;
    Thee, who didst give Thy Flesh and Blood
      My ransom-price to pay?

{48}

  4 O come! in this sweet morning hour
      Feed me with Food divine;
    And fill with all Thy love and power
      This worthless heart of mine.  Amen.


5.

  1 And now, O Father, mindful of the love
      That bought us, once for all, on Calvary's Tree,
    And having with us Him that pleads above,
      We here present, we here spread forth to Thee
    That only Offering perfect in Thine eyes,
    The one true, pure, immortal sacrifice.

  2 Look, Father, look on His anointed face,
      And only look on us as found in Him;
    Look not on our misusings of Thy grace,
      Our prayer so languid, and our faith so dim:
    For lo! between our sins and their reward
    We set the Passion of Thy Son our Lord.

  3 And then for those, our dearest and our best,
      By this prevailing presence we appeal;
    O fold them closer to Thy mercy's breast,
      O do Thine utmost for their souls' true weal;
    From tainting mischief keep them white and clear,
    And crown Thy gifts with strength to persevere.

{49}

  4 And so we come; O draw us to Thy feet,
      Most patient Saviour, Who canst love us still;
    And by this Food, so awful and so sweet,
      Deliver us from every touch of ill:
    In Thine own service make us glad and free,
    And grant us never more to part with Thee.
      Amen.


6.

  1 Sweet feast of love divine;
      'Tis grace that makes us free
    To feed upon this Bread and Wine,
      In memory, Lord, of Thee.

  2 Here every welcome guest
      Waits, Lord, from Thee to learn
    The secrets of Thy Father's breast,
      And all Thy grace discern.

  3 Here conscience ends its strife,
      And faith delights to prove
    The sweetness of the Bread of life,
      The fulness of Thy love.

  4 The Blood that flowed for sin
      In symbol here we see,
    And feel the blessed pledge within,
      That we are loved of Thee.

{50}

  5 O if this glimpse of love
      Is so divinely sweet,
    What will it be, O Lord, above,
      Thy gladdening smile to meet;

  6 To see Thee face to face,
      Thy perfect likeness wear,
    And all Thy ways of wondrous grace
      Through endless years declare.  Amen.


7.

THANKSGIVING.

  1 In full and glad surrender
      I give myself to Thee,
    Thine utterly and only
      And evermore to be.

  2 O Son of God, who lovest me,
      I will be Thine alone;
    And all I have and am, Lord,
      Shall henceforth be Thine own!

  3 Reign over me, Lord Jesus;
      O make my heart Thy throne:
    It shall be Thine, dear Saviour,
      It shall be Thine alone.

{51}

  4 O come and reign, Lord Jesus;
      Rule over everything!
    And keep me always loyal,
      And true to Thee, my King.  Amen.


8.

  1 Jesu, gentlest Saviour,
      God of might and power,
    Thou Thyself art dwelling
      In us at this hour.

  2 Nature cannot hold Thee,
      Heaven is all too strait
    For Thine endless glory
      And Thy royal state.

  3 Out beyond the shining
      Of the furthest star
    Thou art ever stretching
      Infinitely far.

  4 Yet the hearts of children
      Hold what words cannot,
    And the God of wonders
      Loves the lowly spot.

  5 Jesu, gentlest Saviour,
      Dwelling in us now,
    Fill us full of goodness
      Till our hearts o'erflow.

{52}

  6 Multiply our graces,
      Chiefly love and fear,
    And, dear Lord, the chiefest,
      Grace to persevere.  Amen.


9

MORNING.

  1 My Father, for another night
      Of quiet sleep and rest,
    For all the joy of morning light,
      Thy holy Name be blest.

  2 Now with the new-born day I give
      Myself anew to Thee,
    That as thou willest I may live,
      And what Thou willest be.

  3 Whate'er I do, things great or small,
      Whate'er I speak or frame,
    Thy glory may I seek in all,
      Do all in Jesus' Name.

  4 My Father, for His sake, I pray,
      Thy child accept and bless;
    And lead me by Thy grace to-day
      In paths of righteousness.  Amen.


{53}

10

  1 Lord, for to-morrow and its needs
      I do not pray;
    Keep me, my God, from stain of sin,
      Just for to-day.

  2 Let me both diligently work
      And duly pray;
    Let me be kind in word and deed,
      Just for to-day.

  3 Let me be slow to do my will,
      Prompt to obey;
    Help me to sacrifice myself,
      Just for to-day.

  4 Let me no wrong or idle word
      Unthinking say;
    Set Thou a seal upon my lips,
      Just for to-day.

  5 Let me in season, Lord, be grave,
      In season gay;
    Let me be faithful to Thy grace,
      Just for to-day.

  6 Lord, for to-morrow and its needs,
      I do not pray;
    But keep me, guide me, love me, Lord,
      Just for to-day.  Amen.


{54}

11

EVENING.

  1 Glory to Thee, my God, this night
      For all the blessings of the light;
    Keep me, O keep me, King of kings,
      Beneath Thine own almighty wings.

  2 Forgive me, Lord, for Thy dear Son,
      The ill that I this day have done,
    That with the world, myself, and Thee,
      I, ere I sleep, at peace may be.

  3 Teach me to live, that I may dread
      The grave as little as my bed;
    Teach me to die, that so I may
      Rise glorious at the awful day.

  4 O may my soul on Thee repose,
      And may sweet sleep mine eyelids close,
    Sleep that shall me more vigorous make
      To serve my God when I awake.

  5 When in the night I sleepless lie,
      My soul with heavenly thoughts supply;
    Let no ill dreams disturb my rest,
      No powers of darkness me molest.

{55}

  6 Praise God, from whom all blessings flow;
      Praise Him, all creatures here below;
    Praise Him above, ye heavenly host;
      Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.  Amen.


12

  Lord, keep us safe this night,
    "Secure from all our fears;
  May angels guard us while we sleep,
    Till morning light appears.




PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY

WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED

LONDON AND BECCLES.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Door of Heaven, by A. E. Burgett

